4.9 Fundamentals of communication and networking
 4.9.1 Communication
 4.9.1.1 Communication methods
 Content Additional information
 Define serial and parallel transmission methods
 and discuss the advantages of serial over
 parallel transmission.
 Define and compare synchronous and
 asynchronous data transmission.
 Describe the purpose of start and stop bits in
 asynchronous data transmission.
 4.9.1.2 Communication basics
 Content Additional information
 Define:
 • baud rate
 • bit rate
 • bandwidth
 • latency
 • protocol.
 Differentiate between baud rate and bit rate. Bit rate can be higher than baud rate if more
 than one bit is encoded in each signal change.
 Understand the relationship between bit rate
 and bandwidth.
 Bit rate is directly proportionate to bandwidth.
 82   Visit for the most up-to-date specification, resources, support and administration
4.9.2 Networking
 4.9.2.1 Network topology
 Content Additional information
 Understand:
 • physical star topology
 • logical bus network topology
 and:
 • differentiate between them
 • explain their operation
 A network physically wired in star topology can
 behave logically as a bus network by using a
 bus protocol and appropriate physical switching.
 4.9.2.2 Types of networking between hosts
 Content Additional information
 Explain the following and describe situations
 where they might be used:
 • peer-to-peer networking
 • client-server networking.
 In a peer-to-peer network, each computer has
 equal status. In a client-server network, most
 computers are nominated as clients and one or
 more as servers. The clients request services
 from the servers, which provide these services,
 for example file server, email server.
 4.9.2.3 Wireless networking
 Content Additional information
 Explain the purpose of WiFi. A wireless local area network that is based on
 international standards.
 Used to enable devices to connect to a network
 wirelessly.
 Be familiar with the components required for
 wireless networking.
 Wireless network adapter.
 Wireless access point.
 Be familiar with how wireless networks are
 secured.
 Strong encryption of transmitted data using
 WPA (Wifi Protected Access)/WPA2, SSID
 (Service Set Identifier) broadcast disabled,
 MAC (Media Access Control) address allow list.
 Explain the wireless protocol Carrier Sense
 Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance
 (CSMA/CA) with and without Request to Send/
 Clear to Send (RTS/CTS).
 Knowledge of Carrier Sense Multiple Access/
 Collection Detection (CSMA/CD) as used in, for
 example, Ethernet, is not required.
 Be familiar with the purpose of Service Set
 Identifier (SSID).
 AQA AS and A-level Computer Science . AS and A-level exams June 2016 onwards. Version 1.6 31 July 2023
 Visit for the most up-to-date specification, resources, support and administration   83
4.9.3 The Internet
 4.9.3.1 The Internet and how it works
 Content Additional information
 Understand the structure of the Internet.
 Understand the role of packet switching and
 routers.
 Know the main components of a packet.
 Define:
 • router
 • gateway.
 Consider where and why they are used.
 Explain how routing is achieved across the
 Internet.
 Describe the term 'uniform resource locator'
 (URL) in the context of internetworking.
 Explain the terms ‘fully qualified domain name’
 (FQDN), ‘domain name’ and ‘IP address’.
 Describe how domain names are organised.
 Understand the purpose and function of the
 domain service and its reliance on the Domain
 Name Server (DNS) system.
 Explain the service provided by Internet
 registries and why they are needed.
 4.9.3.2 Internet security
 Content Additional information
 Understand how a firewall works (packet
 filtering, proxy server, stateful inspection).
 Explain symmetric and asymmetric (private/
 public key) encryption and key exchange.
 Explain how digital certificates and digital
 signatures are obtained and used.
 84   Visit for the most up-to-date specification, resources, support and administration
Content Additional information
 Discuss worms, trojans and viruses, and the
 vulnerabilities that they exploit.
 Discuss how improved code quality, monitoring
 and protection can be used to address worms,
 trojans and viruses.
 4.9.4 The Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP)
 protocol
 4.9.4.1 TCP/IP
 Content Additional information
 Describe the role of the four layers of the
 TCP/IP stack (application, transport, network,
 link).
 Describe the role of sockets in the TCP/IP
 stack.
 Be familiar with the role of MAC (Media Access
 Control) addresses.
 Explain what the well-known ports and client
 ports are used for and the differences between
 them.
 4.9.4.2 Standard application layer protocols
 Content Additional information
 Be familiar with the following protocols:
 • FTP (File Transfer Protocol)
 • HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol)
 • HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol
 Secure)
 • POP3 (Post Office Protocol (v3))
 • SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol)
 • SSH (Secure Shell).
 Be familiar with FTP client software and an FTP
 server, with regard to transferring files using
 anonymous and non-anonymous access.
 Be familiar with how SSH is used for remote
 management.
 AQA AS and A-level Computer Science . AS and A-level exams June 2016 onwards. Version 1.6 31 July 2023
 Visit for the most up-to-date specification, resources, support and administration   85
Content Additional information
 Know how an SSH client is used to make a
 TCP connection to a remote port for the
 purpose of sending commands to this port using
 application level protocols such as GET for
 HTTP, SMTP commands for sending email and
 POP3 for retrieving email.
 Be familiar with using SSH to log in securely to
 a remote computer and execute commands.
 Explain the role of an email server in retrieving
 and sending email.
 Explain the role of a web server in serving up
 web pages in text form.
 Understand the role of a web browser in
 retrieving web pages and web page resources
 and rendering these accordingly.
 4.9.4.3 IP address structure
 Content Additional information
 Know that an IP address is split into a network
 identifier part and a host identifier part.
 4.9.4.4 Subnet masking
 Content Additional information
 Know that networks can be divided into subnets
 and know how a subnet mask is used to identify
 the network identifier part of the IP address.
 4.9.4.5 IP standards
 Content Additional information
 Know that there are currently two standards of
 IP address, v4 and v6.
 Know why v6 was introduced.
 86   Visit for the most up-to-date specification, resources, support and administration
4.9.4.6 Public and private IP addresses
 Content Additional information
 Distinguish between routable and non-routable
 IP addresses.
 4.9.4.7 Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)
 Content Additional information
 Understand the purpose and function of the
 DHCP system.
 4.9.4.8 Network Address Translation (NAT)
 Content Additional information
 Explain the basic concept of NAT and why it is
 used.
 4.9.4.9 Port forwarding
 Content Additional information
 Explain the basic concept of port forwarding
 and why it is used.
 4.9.4.10 Client server model
 Content Additional information
 Be familiar with the client server model. Client sends a request message to server,
 server responds to request by replying with a
 response message to client.
 Be familiar with the Websocket protocol and
 know why it is used and where it is used.
 The Websocket specification defines an API
 (Application Programming Interface)
 establishing a full-duplex 'socket' connection
 between a web browser and a server over TCP.
 This means that there is a persistent connection
 between client and server, allowing both parties
 to send data at any time.
 AQA AS and A-level Computer Science . AS and A-level exams June 2016 onwards. Version 1.6 31 July 2023
 Visit for the most up-to-date specification, resources, support and administration   87
Content Additional information
 Be familiar with the principles of Web CRUD
 Applications and REST:
 • CRUD is an acronym for:
 • C – Create
 • R – Retrieve
 • U – Update
 • D – Delete.
 • REST enables CRUD to be mapped to
 database functions (SQL) as follows:
 • GET → SELECT
 • POST → INSERT
 • DELETE → DELETE
 • PUT → UPDATE.
 Students should understand the principles:
 • database connected to browser using
 REST – Representational State Transfer 
which relies on HTTP request methods
 • REST allows JavaScript to talk to server
 through HTTP
 • REST API (Application Programming
 Interface) created and run on server,
 browser Javascript calls API
 • JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) or
 XML can be used to transmit data
 between a server and web application
 • Javascript referenced by HTML file, eg
 index.html, is run in browser.
 Compare JSON (Java script object notation)
 with XML.
 JSON compared with XML is:
 • easier for a human to read
 • more compact
 • easier to create
 • easier for computers to parse and
 therefore quicker to parse.
 4.9.4.11 Thin- versus thick-client computing
 Content Additional information
 Compare and contrast thin-client computing
 with thick-client computing